Brian Hopkins: Good morning! Thanks for joining today's session.
Brian Hopkins: I'm Brian Hopkins, VP and Principal Analyst here at Forrester.
Sarah Chen: Good morning Brian. I'm Sarah Chen, VP of Digital Innovation at Delta.
Sarah Chen: Really excited to discuss agentic AI with you today.
Brian Hopkins: Excellent. So I understand you're exploring agentic AI implementations.
Brian Hopkins: Can you give me a sense of where Delta is in this journey and what's driving the interest?
Sarah Chen: Absolutely. We've been experimenting with traditional AI for customer service for a few years now.
Sarah Chen: But we're seeing limitations with rule-based systems and simple chatbots.
Sarah Chen: Our customers expect more dynamic, personalized experiences, especially when disruptions occur.
Sarah Chen: We're looking at agentic AI to handle complex rebooking scenarios autonomously.
Brian Hopkins: That makes perfect sense. The airline industry is ideal for agentic AI.
Brian Hopkins: Let me start by clarifying what we mean by agentic AI versus other AI approaches.
Brian Hopkins: Agentic AI systems can perceive their environment, make decisions, and take actions autonomously.
Brian Hopkins: They're not just responding to prompts - they're actually pursuing goals.
Sarah Chen: Right, so instead of a customer asking "can you rebook me?" and getting options...
Sarah Chen: The agent would proactively identify the issue, evaluate alternatives, and execute the rebooking?
Brian Hopkins: Exactly. And it does this by interacting with multiple systems.
Brian Hopkins: It might check your reservation system, inventory, customer profile, weather data.
Brian Hopkins: Then it reasons through the options and takes action within defined guardrails.
Sarah Chen: We're particularly interested in weather-related disruptions. That's our biggest pain point.
Sarah Chen: When a storm hits Atlanta, we have thousands of rebookings happening simultaneously.
Sarah Chen: Our call centers get overwhelmed and customers wait hours for assistance.
Brian Hopkins: This is where agentic AI really shines. Let me walk you through a framework.
Brian Hopkins: First, you need to think about the agent's decision-making boundaries.
Brian Hopkins: What can it do autonomously versus what requires human escalation?
Sarah Chen: That's actually one of our biggest concerns - how do we set those boundaries?
Sarah Chen: We don't want agents making decisions that negatively impact revenue or customer trust.
Brian Hopkins: Great question. In our research, we've identified three levels of agent autonomy.
Brian Hopkins: Level one is assisted autonomy - the agent recommends actions but humans approve.
Brian Hopkins: Level two is conditional autonomy - agents act within strict parameters automatically.
Brian Hopkins: Level three is delegated autonomy - agents handle entire workflows end-to-end.
Sarah Chen: I'm thinking we'd start with level two for rebooking scenarios.
Sarah Chen: Like, the agent can automatically rebook if the new flight is within 2 hours of original.
Sarah Chen: And the fare class is equal or better, and the customer is not in a special status.
Brian Hopkins: Perfect. You're thinking about this the right way with clear constraints.
Brian Hopkins: Now, let's talk about the technical architecture you'll need to support this.
Brian Hopkins: Agentic AI requires more than just a large language model - it's a complete system.
Brian Hopkins: You need reasoning engines, memory systems, tool integration, and orchestration layers.
Sarah Chen: We're currently using Azure OpenAI for our chatbots.
Sarah Chen: Can we build agentic capabilities on top of that or do we need something different?
Brian Hopkins: Azure OpenAI is a good foundation, but you'll need additional components.
Brian Hopkins: Microsoft has Semantic Kernel and AutoGen frameworks for building agents.
Brian Hopkins: You'll also want to look at LangGraph or similar frameworks for workflow orchestration.
Brian Hopkins: The key is connecting your LLM to your operational systems - your PSS, inventory, CRM.
Sarah Chen: Our reservation system is Amadeus. We also use Salesforce for customer data.
Sarah Chen: How do we ensure the agent can reliably interact with these systems?
Brian Hopkins: You'll need to create API wrappers that the agent can call as tools or functions.
Brian Hopkins: Each tool needs clear documentation about what it does and when to use it.
Brian Hopkins: The agent's reasoning engine decides which tools to call based on the customer's situation.
Sarah Chen: What about hallucinations? That's a big concern for us.
Sarah Chen: If an agent tells a customer they're rebooked but the system didn't actually update...
Sarah Chen: That's a disaster scenario. How do we prevent that?
Brian Hopkins: Critical question. This is where guardrails and validation layers are essential.
Brian Hopkins: First, use function calling instead of having the agent generate API requests.
Brian Hopkins: The agent declares intent to call a function, but your code makes the actual API call.
Brian Hopkins: Second, always validate the response from your backend systems before confirming to customers.
Brian Hopkins: Third, implement confidence scoring - if the agent isn't certain, escalate.
Sarah Chen: That makes sense. What about testing? How do we validate agent behavior before going live?
Brian Hopkins: Testing agentic systems is more complex than traditional software testing.
Brian Hopkins: You need scenario-based testing with real customer situations and edge cases.
Brian Hopkins: We recommend building a shadow mode where agents process real requests but don't execute actions.
Brian Hopkins: You compare agent decisions to what human agents would do.
Brian Hopkins: Once accuracy reaches your threshold, maybe 95%, you move to production.
Sarah Chen: How long does that testing phase typically take for something like this?
Brian Hopkins: Based on implementations we've seen, plan for 3 to 6 months minimum.
Brian Hopkins: Airlines have tried to rush this and faced significant customer service issues.
Brian Hopkins: Better to be methodical and build trust in the system gradually.
Sarah Chen: What about explainability? If an agent makes a decision we need to understand why.
Sarah Chen: Both for customer service purposes and regulatory compliance.
Brian Hopkins: Absolutely essential. You need comprehensive logging of the agent's reasoning process.
Brian Hopkins: Log every tool call, every decision point, every data point considered.
Brian Hopkins: Modern agentic frameworks support this with reasoning traces and audit logs.
Brian Hopkins: You should be able to replay any decision the agent made and see exactly why.
Sarah Chen: That's reassuring. What about continuous improvement?
Sarah Chen: How do we make sure the agents get better over time based on real performance?
Brian Hopkins: You'll want a feedback loop with both quantitative and qualitative metrics.
Brian Hopkins: Track success rates, escalation rates, customer satisfaction scores.
Brian Hopkins: Also collect feedback from human agents when they take over escalated cases.
Brian Hopkins: Use this data to refine your prompts, adjust guardrails, and add new capabilities.
Sarah Chen: Let's talk about cost. What should we expect investment-wise?
Sarah Chen: Both for initial development and ongoing operational costs?
Brian Hopkins: Initial development for a focused use case like rebooking typically runs 500K to 2 million.
Brian Hopkins: That includes platform setup, integration work, testing, and initial training.
Brian Hopkins: Ongoing costs depend heavily on transaction volume and model usage.
Brian Hopkins: For high-volume scenarios, you might spend 50 to 200K monthly on inference costs.
Brian Hopkins: But compare that to call center costs - the ROI can be substantial.
Sarah Chen: We handle about 50,000 disruption-related calls per month.
Sarah Chen: If we can automate even 30 percent, that's significant savings.
Brian Hopkins: Exactly. And customers get faster resolution, which improves satisfaction.
Brian Hopkins: We're seeing airlines achieve 60 to 80 percent automation rates over time.
Brian Hopkins: The key is starting narrow and expanding as you build confidence.
Sarah Chen: What other use cases beyond rebooking should we be thinking about?
Brian Hopkins: Great question. Let me share what we're seeing work well in airlines.
Brian Hopkins: Baggage claim resolution - agents can track bags, file claims, arrange delivery autonomously.
Brian Hopkins: Upgrade management - dynamically offering upgrades based on inventory and customer value.
Brian Hopkins: Schedule change notifications - proactively reaching out with alternatives.
Brian Hopkins: And ancillary sales - intelligently recommending seat selections, bags, priority boarding.
Sarah Chen: The ancillary sales angle is interesting. That could drive revenue, not just save costs.
Brian Hopkins: Absolutely. Agentic AI isn't just about efficiency - it's about better experiences.
Brian Hopkins: When agents understand customer context, they can make smarter recommendations.
Sarah Chen: What about the organizational side? What team structure do we need?
Brian Hopkins: You'll need a cross-functional team - this isn't just an IT project.
Brian Hopkins: Product managers to define agent behaviors, data scientists for model work, engineers for integration.
Brian Hopkins: But critically, you need domain experts from your operations teams.
Brian Hopkins: They understand the nuances of rebooking policies and customer needs.
Sarah Chen: Should we have a dedicated AI ethics or governance person on the team?
Brian Hopkins: Yes, especially for customer-facing agents. You need someone thinking about risks.
Brian Hopkins: Bias in decision-making, privacy concerns, accessibility for all customers.
Brian Hopkins: Major airlines are creating AI governance boards for exactly this reason.
Sarah Chen: How do we handle the change management with our existing call center staff?
Sarah Chen: They might see this as a threat to their jobs.
Brian Hopkins: This is critical and often underestimated. The narrative needs to be about augmentation.
Brian Hopkins: Agents should handle the routine cases so humans can focus on complex situations.
Brian Hopkins: And situations requiring empathy and judgment that AI can't replicate.
Brian Hopkins: Position your call center staff as supervisors and trainers for the AI agents.
Brian Hopkins: Their expertise becomes even more valuable, not less.
Sarah Chen: That's a helpful framing. What about integration with our existing customer service platform?
Sarah Chen: We use a mix of phone, chat, mobile app, and social media channels.
Brian Hopkins: Your agentic system should be channel-agnostic at the core.
Brian Hopkins: Build the reasoning and decision-making logic once, then expose it across channels.
Brian Hopkins: You might have channel-specific interfaces, but the agent's brain is centralized.
Brian Hopkins: This ensures consistent decisions regardless of how customers reach you.
Sarah Chen: Makes sense. What about personalization? How do agents learn customer preferences?
Brian Hopkins: This is where memory systems come in - both short-term and long-term memory.
Brian Hopkins: Short-term memory is the current conversation context.
Brian Hopkins: Long-term memory pulls from customer profiles, past interactions, preferences.
Brian Hopkins: The agent should know if someone always books aisle seats or prefers morning flights.
Brian Hopkins: And use that context to make more personalized decisions.
Sarah Chen: Privacy concerns there though - how much data should agents access?
Brian Hopkins: Exactly right to flag that. This ties back to governance and compliance.
Brian Hopkins: You need clear data access policies - only what's needed for the task.
Brian Hopkins: And full transparency with customers about what data is being used.
Brian Hopkins: GDPR and similar regulations require you to explain automated decision-making.
Sarah Chen: What about multi-agent systems? Should we think about multiple specialized agents?
Sarah Chen: Like one for rebooking, one for baggage, one for loyalty program questions?
Brian Hopkins: That's an advanced pattern we're seeing emerge. Multi-agent orchestration.
Brian Hopkins: You have specialist agents for different domains, coordinated by a supervisor agent.
Brian Hopkins: The supervisor routes requests and synthesizes responses from specialists.
Brian Hopkins: This can work well but adds complexity - I'd start with a single generalist agent.
Brian Hopkins: Add specialists later as you identify clear domains of expertise.
Sarah Chen: What are the biggest mistakes you see companies make with agentic AI?
Brian Hopkins: Number one is trying to boil the ocean - tackling too many use cases at once.
Brian Hopkins: Start with one high-value, well-defined scenario and nail it.
Brian Hopkins: Number two is underestimating integration complexity with legacy systems.
Brian Hopkins: Number three is inadequate testing - you need to test edge cases exhaustively.
Brian Hopkins: And number four is ignoring the human element and change management.
Sarah Chen: Those are helpful guardrails. What about vendor selection?
Sarah Chen: Should we build this ourselves or work with a specialized vendor?
Brian Hopkins: It depends on your technical capabilities and speed requirements.
Brian Hopkins: Building yourself gives you more control and customization.
Brian Hopkins: But vendors like Salesforce, Microsoft, and specialized AI companies have pre-built frameworks.
Brian Hopkins: They can accelerate time-to-value significantly.
Brian Hopkins: I'd recommend a hybrid approach - use vendor platforms but customize heavily.
Sarah Chen: What should we look for in evaluating vendors or platforms?
Brian Hopkins: First, integration capabilities with your existing tech stack.
Brian Hopkins: Second, explainability and observability features for debugging and compliance.
Brian Hopkins: Third, flexibility to customize agent behaviors and workflows.
Brian Hopkins: And fourth, their experience in your industry - airline experience matters.
Sarah Chen: Are there any airlines that are ahead of the curve we could learn from?
Brian Hopkins: Several are experimenting but most are still in pilot phases.
Brian Hopkins: Without naming specific names, we're seeing European and Asian carriers move faster.
Brian Hopkins: But no one has really cracked this at scale yet - it's still early days.
Brian Hopkins: This is an opportunity for Delta to be a leader if you execute well.
Sarah Chen: What timeline should we be thinking about for meaningful impact?
Brian Hopkins: If you start today, plan for 12 to 18 months to production deployment.
Brian Hopkins: That includes 3 months for architecture and design, 6 months for build and integration.
Brian Hopkins: Then 3 to 6 months for testing and shadow mode.
Brian Hopkins: After launch, expect another 6 months of optimization before hitting stride.
Sarah Chen: So we're looking at two years to fully mature capability.
Brian Hopkins: Yes, but you'll see incremental value throughout that journey.
Brian Hopkins: Don't think of it as all or nothing - you can launch limited scenarios earlier.
Sarah Chen: What metrics should we track to measure success?
Brian Hopkins: Start with operational metrics - automation rate, average handle time, first contact resolution.
Brian Hopkins: Then customer metrics - satisfaction scores, net promoter score, complaint rates.
Brian Hopkins: Financial metrics - cost per interaction, revenue impact from upsells.
Brian Hopkins: And AI-specific metrics - accuracy, hallucination rate, escalation reasons.
Sarah Chen: This has been incredibly helpful Brian. A few final questions.
Sarah Chen: What about regulatory considerations? Any specific concerns for airlines?
Brian Hopkins: Airlines face unique regulatory scrutiny around customer service commitments.
Brian Hopkins: DOT regulations around refunds, rebooking rights, compensation.
Brian Hopkins: Your agents must be programmed to comply with these regulations perfectly.
Brian Hopkins: Build in checks and validations - this is non-negotiable.
Brian Hopkins: I'd also recommend legal review of agent behaviors before deployment.
Sarah Chen: And what about security? These agents will have access to sensitive systems.
Brian Hopkins: Critical concern. Think of agents as privileged users requiring strict access controls.
Brian Hopkins: Use service accounts with minimal necessary permissions.
Brian Hopkins: Implement rate limiting to prevent abuse. Monitor for unusual patterns.
Brian Hopkins: And consider prompt injection attacks - malicious users trying to manipulate agents.
Brian Hopkins: You need input validation and output filtering as security layers.
Sarah Chen: Wow, there's a lot to think about. This is really helpful context.
Brian Hopkins: Happy to help. I think Delta is approaching this thoughtfully.
Brian Hopkins: The fact that you're asking these questions now, before rushing in, is a great sign.
Sarah Chen: What resources would you recommend we dig into next?
Brian Hopkins: I'll send you our latest report on enterprise agentic AI implementation patterns.
Brian Hopkins: We also have case studies from travel and hospitality companies.
Brian Hopkins: And I'd recommend looking at academic research from Stanford and MIT on agent reliability.
Brian Hopkins: I can also connect you with a few vendors who specialize in this space.
Sarah Chen: That would be great. Can we schedule a follow-up in a few months?
Sarah Chen: Once we've had a chance to digest this and start our planning?
Brian Hopkins: Absolutely. I'd love to hear how your thinking evolves.
Brian Hopkins: And if you hit any roadblocks or technical questions, feel free to reach out.
Sarah Chen: Perfect. This has given us a great foundation to move forward.
Sarah Chen: I'm excited about the possibilities but also more realistic about the complexity.
Brian Hopkins: That's exactly the right mindset. Optimistic but grounded.
Brian Hopkins: Agentic AI will transform customer service, but it takes careful implementation.
Sarah Chen: Thanks so much Brian. Really appreciate your time and expertise.
Brian Hopkins: My pleasure Sarah. Good luck with your initiative.
Brian Hopkins: Looking forward to seeing Delta lead the way in agentic customer service.
Sarah Chen: Thanks! Talk soon.
Brian Hopkins: Take care.